# Course components

You're on your own through this course most of the time, though we will be,
quite literally, on your side when you're in the labs.

Make good use of the various materials that are in the course. Here's a guided
tour through the important parts.

## Lectures

These discuss all theory that is needed to pass the quizzes. Watch the lectures
before or on your way to the lab sessions, in order to be able to spend your
lab time programming and asking questions.

## Sections

Lectures are supplemented by weekly, sections led by MIT teaching assistants.
Sections more thoroughly discuss some of the material from the lectures.

## Problem Sets

The twelve problem sets are the hard work of the course, on which you will
spend most of the lab time and then some more.

You have four "late days" that you may "spend" during the semester, each of
which provides you with an extension of twenty-four hours. You may spend no
more than one late day on any particular problem set. You need not inform the
staff of your use of a late day; usage of late days is tracked automatically.
Lateness of electronic submissions is determined down to the minute by
submissions' timestamps. Submitting more than seven minutes late is equivalent
to submitting twenty-four hours late. Late work is not accepted once you have
exhausted your late days, except in cases of emergency. Technical difficulties
are not considered emergencies.

Problem sets and the final project will be evaluated along the following axes:

* Scope

	Have you tried doing everything?

	0. empty or not submitted
	1. incomplete
	2. most of it is there, but a small part is missing
	3. you've done everything required
	4. you've tried some extras
	5. above and beyond: a real extra
	{: start="0"}

* Correctness

	Does your program do what is expected by a user?

	0. will not work at all
	1. takes too much time to get it working
	2. some problems, but we can fix them, probably a mistake
	3. it works, but not necessarily always the correct result
	4. correct results in all common cases of input
	5. perfection: always correct, even with erroneous input
	{: start="0"}

* Design

	How orderly is your code?

	0. we are unable to understand the structure
	1. lots of complex code and/or trying to avoid newly learned constructs
	2. too complicated, but you know your stuff
	3. straightforward code, could be put a bit inefficiently
	4. makes good use of the possibilities in the language
	5. perfection: you've read up on design and applied it to your code
	{: start="0"}

* Style

	How readable is your code?

	0. completely unreadable to us
	1. once or twice you did it right, but you should study the style guide
	2. you've read the style guide but haven't applied it consistently
	3. your code is readable and consistent, barring some minor problems
	4. the code is consistent, and only well-reasoned deviations from the guide
	5. perfection: you've made your own choices but maintained consistency
	{: start="0"}

Grades are ordinarily determined by

$$"scope" * (3 * "correctness" + 2 * "design" + 1 * "style")$$.

Scores are normalized across TFs at term's end, so mid-semester comparisons
among students of scores are not reliable indicators of standing.

Although you must submit all problem sets, your lowest score among those
problem sets on which you received perfect scores for the axis of scope will be
dropped when final grades are determined.

## Quizzes

The course has two 2-hour quizzes. These quizzes are "closed-book," but you
may utilize during each quiz one two-sided page (A4) of notes, typed or
written, and a pen or pencil, nothing else.

To prepare, regularly re-read your lecture notes and be sure to ask the course
assistants to help you find answers if anything is unclear.
